# CRISPR targeting of H3K4me3 activates gene expression and unlocks centromere-proximal crossover recombination in Arabidopsis
Abstract: H3K4me3 is a fundamental and highly conserved chromatin mark across eukaryotes, playing a central role in many genome-related processes, including transcription, maintenance of cell identity, DNA damage repair, and recombination. However, identifying the causal function of H3K4me3 in these diverse pathways remains a challenge, and we lack the tools to manipulate it for agricultural benefit. Here we use the CRISPR-based SunTag system to direct H3K4me3 methyltransferases in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. Targeting of SunTag-SDG2 activates the expression of the endogenous reporter gene, FWA. We show that SunTag-SDG2 can be employed to increase pathogen resistance by targeting the H3K4me3-dependent disease resistance gene, SNC1. Recombination rates impose a limit on the speed with which new traits can be transferred to elite crop varieties. We demonstrate that targeting of SunTag-SDG2 to low recombining centromeric regions can massively stimulate crossover formation. Finally, we reveal that the effect is not specific to SDG2 and is likely dependent on the H3K4me3 mark itself, as the orthogonal mammalian-derived H3K4me3 methyltransferase, PRDM9, produces a similar effect with reduced off-target potential. Overall, our study supports an instructive role for H3K4me3 in transcription and meiotic recombination and opens the door to precise modulation of important agricultural traits.

This repository contains commands and scripts related to the manuscript above.
